README.md, before:

# ruby-practice and notes

some practice files from Linkedin Learning’s [Ruby Essential Training Part 1: The Basics](https://www.linkedin.com/learning/ruby-essential-training-part-1-the-basics)

This assumes knowledge coming from JavaScript

notes below:

# Objects

## Numbers

- use floats for precision calculations
- integer •/÷ integer make less precise (rounded) results

```ruby

# change to float
num.to_f

# change to integer, truncates like .floor
num.to_i

.round
.floor
.ceil
.abs
```

## Strings

- mutable

```ruby
# append
string << "substr"

# multiplication
string * 3

# type conversion
# number to string
num.to_s

# string to integer
string.to_i

# all caps
string.upcase

# lowercase all
string.downcase

# title case
string.capitalize

# reverse chars
string.reverse
 
# length
string.length
```

### double-quoted string powers

```ruby
# tab, newline
"\t \n"

# string interpolation
"some string #{variable}"
```

## Arrays

```ruby
# append ( like arr.push )
array << element

# indexing
array[-1] # last element
array[-2] # second til last 
   etc...

# portion of array
array[starting_i, num_of_elem]
array[starting_i.. ending_i] # range, where starting_i < ending_i
```

### array methods

```ruby
# ! at the end of the methods reassigns the array to the change
array.reverse
array.shuffle
array.flatten

# removes duplicate values
array.uniq

# removes all nils
array.compact

# ? to query or find out about something
array.include?(element_val) # returns true or false

# delete value and index and shifts everything over
array.delete_at(index) # returns the deleted value

# find value and delete if found
array.delete(value) # returns deleted value or nil

# array <-> string (delimiter = optional)
array.join(delimiter) 
string.split(delimiter)

# stack methods
array.push
array.pop
array.shift
array.unshift

# add/remove elements
array + [ele1, ele2, ele3]
array - [element]

#find index of value
array.index(value) # returns index or nil

```

## Hashes

- aka dictionaries, associative arrays
- unordered
- find items by key, not position

```ruby
hash = {
   'key' => 'value',
   'label' => 'value'
}

# accessing obj
hash['key'] # returns 'value'

# assigning
hash['label'] = 'another value'

# return array
hash.keys # of keys
hash.values # of values

# converts hash -> array
hash.to_a # returns 2D array of [key, value]
```

## Symbols

- immutable labels, not variables
- start with :
- lowercase, underscores
- cannot start key with numbers
- no quotes or spaces
- can be used in hashes
- refers to exact same item `.object_id` in memory, opposed to strings
  - less frequent garbage collection

```ruby
hash =  {
   :some_key => 'Some value',
   :a_symbol => 'a value'
}

# retrieve a value
hash[:a_symbol] # returns 'a value'

# shorthand looks like json
hash = {
   some_key: 'Some value',
   a_symbol: 'a value'
}

# shorthand keys are ALWAYS all symbols
hash.keys.first.class # returns Symbol
```

## Booleans

- methods names that end in `?` returns booleans

```ruby
[1, 2, 3].include?(2) # returns true
2.between?(5,8) # returns false
[].empty? # true
hash.has_key?(:some_key) # true
hash.has_value?('value') # false
```

### Comparison + Logic Operators

```ruby
==  <  >  <=  >=  !  !=  &&  ||

true.class # returns TrueClass
false.class # returns FalseClass
```

## Ranges

- must wrap range in parens before calling methods if it is not in a variable
- avoid using exclusive ranges

```ruby
range.class = Range

# inclusive
1..10

# exclusive
1...10

# first item in range
range.first
range.begin

# last item of range
range.last
range.end

# create array from range
array = [*range]

# works with string chars
('a'..'m').include?('g') # return true

```

## Constants

- not obj but reference them
- all caps naming convention
  - title case works but not advised
- not meant to change but changeable
  - ruby will issue warning + change it

```ruby
THIS_IS_CONSTANT = 40
this_variable = 55
This_is_also_const = 'but ill advised'
```

## Nil

- aka null

```ruby
nil.class # returns NilClass

# nil is not false
nil == false # returns false

# 3 methods to check if something is nil
nil.nil? # returns true
88 == nil # returns false
!nil # returns true, checks if it has a thing
!88 # returns false, because it exists
!variable
```

# Control Structures

## Conditionals

### if, elsif, else

```ruby
if boolean
   # ...
elsif boolean
   # ...
else
   # ...
end
```

### unless

- like a reverse if
- can chain with else

```ruby
unless boolean
   # ...
end

# equivalent to
if !boolean
   # ...
end

# example
unless array.empty?
 # ...
end
```

### case

```ruby
# case with booleans
# very flexible
case
when boolean
   # ...
when boolean
   # ...
else # default (optional)
   # ...
end

# case with comparisons
# simplified for comparing values
case test_value
when value
   # ...
when value
   # ...
else # default (optional)
   # ...
end
```

## Short-hand Operators

### ternary 

```ruby
boolean ? true_result : else_result
```

### Or Operator 

- great for setting default values

```ruby
x = y || z

# same as
y ? x = y : x = z
```

### Or-Equals Operator

```ruby
# if x has a value, use it, otherwise, set x = y
# does not execute if x has a value
x ||= y

# same as
unless x
   x = y
end
```

### Statement Modifieers

- only for single lines for readability

```ruby
x = y unless x
puts "Hello" if greeting_enabled
```

## Loops

```ruby
# infinite by default, needs control methods
loop do
   # ...
end
```

### control methods


```ruby
break # terminates whole loop
next # jump to next loop
redo # redo this loop
retry # restart whole loop
```

```ruby
# example
i = 5
loop do
   break if i <= 0
   puts "Countdown: #{i}"
   i -= 1
end
puts "Blast off!"
```

### while, until

- do is optional here?
- break is built into this loop
  
```ruby
# run while something is still true
while boolean
   # ...
end

# run until something becomes true
until boolean
   # ...
end
```

```ruby
# example: do/break is built into this loop
i = 5
while i > 0 # or until i <= 0 
   puts "Countdown: #{i}"
   i -= 1
end
puts "Blast off!"
```

## Iterators

- usually performs code on each item in a set ( array, hash, range ) of values to iterate through

```ruby
# example: times
i = 5
i.times do
   puts "Countdown: #{i}"
   i -= 1
end
puts "Blast off!"
```

### times, upto, downto, each

```ruby
5.times { puts "Hello" }
1.upto(5) { puts "Hello" }
5.downto(1) { puts "Hello" }
(1..5).each { puts "Hello" }
```

### Block Variables

- thing inside pipes == block variable
- only used inside its block
- next value become block variable as it iterates

```ruby
5.downto(1) do |i|
   puts "Countdown: #{i}"
end
puts "Blast off!"
```

### numbers

```ruby
num.times
1.upto(2)
5.downto(1)
num.step
```

### range

```ruby
range.each
(1..5).step
```

### string

```ruby
'str'.each_line
'str'.each_char
'str'.each_byte
```

### array

```ruby
array.each
['arr', 'ay'].each_index
[1, 2, 3].each_with_index
```

### hash

```ruby
hash.each
hash.each_key
hash.each_value
hash.each_pair
```

### for...in

```ruby
# example
fruits = ['banana', 'apple', 'pear']

# most common usage
fruits.each.do |fruit|
   puts fruit.capitalize
end

# same as
for fruit in fruits
   puts fruit.capitalize
end
```

<!--
```ruby

``` -->

# Ruby Scripting

## Best Practices

- name files with `.rb`
- shebang line at top: 
  - `#!/usr/bin/env ruby`
  - allows ruby scripts to be run anywhere
  - tells unix to go to environment and ask it to tell which vers of ruby to use
  
```bash
# shell command: what shebang does
/usr/bin/env ruby -v
```

## Exit a Running Script

- unlike `break`, which only stops looping but continues running the rest of the script

- `exit`, `exit!`
- `abort ( msg )`
  - useful for including error message
  - same as `puts msg` and then `exit`
- type `ctrl + c`
  - sends an interrupt signal and tells the program to stop running

## Input and Output

### Output

```ruby
puts # outputs a line return no matter what
print # all together on a single line

puts "Hello"
# same as 
print "Hello\n"
```

### Input
#### `gets`

- `gets` it from standard input, usually user input
- code will stop and listen to the keyboard for the user to enter data and hit return
- the line return is included in `gets`
  - usually `chop` or `chomp` to remove line return (interchangeable)
  - `chop` removes last character of a string
  - `chomp` removes last character of a string if it is a new line character (usually used)

```ruby
# example
print "What is your name? "
respone = gets.chomp

puts "Hello, #{response}!"
# Hello, PicaQ!
```

Commit message:

add observation in gets section

README.md, after:

# ruby-practice and notes

some practice files from Linkedin Learning’s [Ruby Essential Training Part 1: The Basics](https://www.linkedin.com/learning/ruby-essential-training-part-1-the-basics)

This assumes knowledge coming from JavaScript

notes below:

# Objects

## Numbers

- use floats for precision calculations
- integer •/÷ integer make less precise (rounded) results

```ruby

# change to float
num.to_f

# change to integer, truncates like .floor
num.to_i

.round
.floor
.ceil
.abs
```

## Strings

- mutable

```ruby
# append
string << "substr"

# multiplication
string * 3

# type conversion
# number to string
num.to_s

# string to integer
string.to_i

# all caps
string.upcase

# lowercase all
string.downcase

# title case
string.capitalize

# reverse chars
string.reverse
 
# length
string.length
```

### double-quoted string powers

```ruby
# tab, newline
"\t \n"

# string interpolation
"some string #{variable}"
```

## Arrays

```ruby
# append ( like arr.push )
array << element

# indexing
array[-1] # last element
array[-2] # second til last 
   etc...

# portion of array
array[starting_i, num_of_elem]
array[starting_i.. ending_i] # range, where starting_i < ending_i
```

### array methods

```ruby
# ! at the end of the methods reassigns the array to the change
array.reverse
array.shuffle
array.flatten

# removes duplicate values
array.uniq

# removes all nils
array.compact

# ? to query or find out about something
array.include?(element_val) # returns true or false

# delete value and index and shifts everything over
array.delete_at(index) # returns the deleted value

# find value and delete if found
array.delete(value) # returns deleted value or nil

# array <-> string (delimiter = optional)
array.join(delimiter) 
string.split(delimiter)

# stack methods
array.push
array.pop
array.shift
array.unshift

# add/remove elements
array + [ele1, ele2, ele3]
array - [element]

#find index of value
array.index(value) # returns index or nil

```

## Hashes

- aka dictionaries, associative arrays
- unordered
- find items by key, not position

```ruby
hash = {
   'key' => 'value',
   'label' => 'value'
}

# accessing obj
hash['key'] # returns 'value'

# assigning
hash['label'] = 'another value'

# return array
hash.keys # of keys
hash.values # of values

# converts hash -> array
hash.to_a # returns 2D array of [key, value]
```

## Symbols

- immutable labels, not variables
- start with :
- lowercase, underscores
- cannot start key with numbers
- no quotes or spaces
- can be used in hashes
- refers to exact same item `.object_id` in memory, opposed to strings
  - less frequent garbage collection

```ruby
hash =  {
   :some_key => 'Some value',
   :a_symbol => 'a value'
}

# retrieve a value
hash[:a_symbol] # returns 'a value'

# shorthand looks like json
hash = {
   some_key: 'Some value',
   a_symbol: 'a value'
}

# shorthand keys are ALWAYS all symbols
hash.keys.first.class # returns Symbol
```

## Booleans

- methods names that end in `?` returns booleans

```ruby
[1, 2, 3].include?(2) # returns true
2.between?(5,8) # returns false
[].empty? # true
hash.has_key?(:some_key) # true
hash.has_value?('value') # false
```

### Comparison + Logic Operators

```ruby
==  <  >  <=  >=  !  !=  &&  ||

true.class # returns TrueClass
false.class # returns FalseClass
```

## Ranges

- must wrap range in parens before calling methods if it is not in a variable
- avoid using exclusive ranges

```ruby
range.class = Range

# inclusive
1..10

# exclusive
1...10

# first item in range
range.first
range.begin

# last item of range
range.last
range.end

# create array from range
array = [*range]

# works with string chars
('a'..'m').include?('g') # return true

```

## Constants

- not obj but reference them
- all caps naming convention
  - title case works but not advised
- not meant to change but changeable
  - ruby will issue warning + change it

```ruby
THIS_IS_CONSTANT = 40
this_variable = 55
This_is_also_const = 'but ill advised'
```

## Nil

- aka null

```ruby
nil.class # returns NilClass

# nil is not false
nil == false # returns false

# 3 methods to check if something is nil
nil.nil? # returns true
88 == nil # returns false
!nil # returns true, checks if it has a thing
!88 # returns false, because it exists
!variable
```

# Control Structures

## Conditionals

### if, elsif, else

```ruby
if boolean
   # ...
elsif boolean
   # ...
else
   # ...
end
```

### unless

- like a reverse if
- can chain with else

```ruby
unless boolean
   # ...
end

# equivalent to
if !boolean
   # ...
end

# example
unless array.empty?
 # ...
end
```

### case

```ruby
# case with booleans
# very flexible
case
when boolean
   # ...
when boolean
   # ...
else # default (optional)
   # ...
end

# case with comparisons
# simplified for comparing values
case test_value
when value
   # ...
when value
   # ...
else # default (optional)
   # ...
end
```

## Short-hand Operators

### ternary 

```ruby
boolean ? true_result : else_result
```

### Or Operator 

- great for setting default values

```ruby
x = y || z

# same as
y ? x = y : x = z
```

### Or-Equals Operator

```ruby
# if x has a value, use it, otherwise, set x = y
# does not execute if x has a value
x ||= y

# same as
unless x
   x = y
end
```

### Statement Modifieers

- only for single lines for readability

```ruby
x = y unless x
puts "Hello" if greeting_enabled
```

## Loops

```ruby
# infinite by default, needs control methods
loop do
   # ...
end
```

### control methods


```ruby
break # terminates whole loop
next # jump to next loop
redo # redo this loop
retry # restart whole loop
```

```ruby
# example
i = 5
loop do
   break if i <= 0
   puts "Countdown: #{i}"
   i -= 1
end
puts "Blast off!"
```

### while, until

- do is optional here?
- break is built into this loop
  
```ruby
# run while something is still true
while boolean
   # ...
end

# run until something becomes true
until boolean
   # ...
end
```

```ruby
# example: do/break is built into this loop
i = 5
while i > 0 # or until i <= 0 
   puts "Countdown: #{i}"
   i -= 1
end
puts "Blast off!"
```

## Iterators

- usually performs code on each item in a set ( array, hash, range ) of values to iterate through

```ruby
# example: times
i = 5
i.times do
   puts "Countdown: #{i}"
   i -= 1
end
puts "Blast off!"
```

### times, upto, downto, each

```ruby
5.times { puts "Hello" }
1.upto(5) { puts "Hello" }
5.downto(1) { puts "Hello" }
(1..5).each { puts "Hello" }
```

### Block Variables

- thing inside pipes == block variable
- only used inside its block
- next value become block variable as it iterates

```ruby
5.downto(1) do |i|
   puts "Countdown: #{i}"
end
puts "Blast off!"
```

### numbers

```ruby
num.times
1.upto(2)
5.downto(1)
num.step
```

### range

```ruby
range.each
(1..5).step
```

### string

```ruby
'str'.each_line
'str'.each_char
'str'.each_byte
```

### array

```ruby
array.each
['arr', 'ay'].each_index
[1, 2, 3].each_with_index
```

### hash

```ruby
hash.each
hash.each_key
hash.each_value
hash.each_pair
```

### for...in

```ruby
# example
fruits = ['banana', 'apple', 'pear']

# most common usage
fruits.each.do |fruit|
   puts fruit.capitalize
end

# same as
for fruit in fruits
   puts fruit.capitalize
end
```

<!--
```ruby

``` -->

# Ruby Scripting

## Best Practices

- name files with `.rb`
- shebang line at top: 
  - `#!/usr/bin/env ruby`
  - allows ruby scripts to be run anywhere
  - tells unix to go to environment and ask it to tell which vers of ruby to use
  
```bash
# shell command: what shebang does
/usr/bin/env ruby -v
```

## Exit a Running Script

- unlike `break`, which only stops looping but continues running the rest of the script

- `exit`, `exit!`
- `abort ( msg )`
  - useful for including error message
  - same as `puts msg` and then `exit`
- type `ctrl + c`
  - sends an interrupt signal and tells the program to stop running

## Input and Output

### Output

```ruby
puts # outputs a line return no matter what
print # all together on a single line

puts "Hello"
# same as 
print "Hello\n"
```

### Input

#### `gets`

- `gets` it from standard input, usually user input
- code will stop and listen to the keyboard for the user to enter data and hit return
- gets is written on the same line as the printed/puts line
- the line return is included in `gets`
  - usually `.chop` or `.chomp` to remove line return (interchangeable)
  - `chop` removes last character of a string
  - `chomp` removes last character of a string if it is a new line character (usually used)

```ruby
# example
print "What is your name? "
respone = gets.chomp

puts "Hello, #{response}!"
# Hello, PicaQ!
```
